|release v0.6.3|_
=================

This is a patch release from ``v0.6.2`` → ``v0.6.3``.

Important Notes
---------------

* With the addition of writing ROOT files in |uproot v4.1.0 release|_ the
  ``xmlio`` extra no longer requires ``uproot3`` and all dependencies on
  ``uproot3`` and ``uproot3-methods`` have been dropped.
  (PR :pr:`1567`)
  ``uproot4`` additionally brings large speedups to writing, which results in an
  order of magnitude faster conversion time for most workspace conversions from
  JSON back to XML + ROOT with ``pyhf json2xml``.
* All backends are now fully compatible and tested with
  `Python 3.9 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0596/>`_.
  (PR :pr:`1574`)
* The TensorFlow backend now supports compatibility with TensorFlow ``v2.2.1``
  and later and TensorFlow Probability ``v0.10.1`` and later.
  (PR :pr:`1001`)
* The :func:`pyhf.workspace.Workspace.data` ``with_aux`` keyword arg has been
  renamed to ``include_auxdata`` to improve API consistency.
  (PR :pr:`1562`)

.. |uproot v4.1.0 release| replace:: ``uproot`` ``v4.1.0``
.. _`uproot v4.1.0 release`: https://github.com/scikit-hep/uproot4/releases/tag/4.1.0

Fixes
-----

* The weakref bug with Click ``v8.0+`` was resolved.
  ``pyhf`` is now fully compatible with Click ``v7`` and ``v8`` releases.
  (PR :pr:`1530`)

Features
--------

Python API
~~~~~~~~~~

* Model parameter names are now propagated to optimizers through addition of the
  :func:`pyhf.pdf._ModelConfig.par_names` API.
  :func:`pyhf.pdf._ModelConfig.par_names` also handles non-scalar modifiers with
  1 parameter.
  (PRs :pr:`1536`, :pr:`1560`)

  .. code:: pycon

      >>> import pyhf
      >>> model = pyhf.simplemodels.uncorrelated_background(
      ...     signal=[12.0, 11.0], bkg=[50.0, 52.0], bkg_uncertainty=[3.0, 7.0]
      ... )
      >>> model.config.parameters
      ['mu', 'uncorr_bkguncrt']
      >>> model.config.npars
      3
      >>> model.config.par_names()
      ['mu', 'uncorr_bkguncrt[0]', 'uncorr_bkguncrt[1]']

* The :class:`pyhf.pdf._ModelConfig` ``channel_nbins`` dict is now sorted by
  keys to match the order of the ``channels`` list.
  (PR :pr:`1546`)

* The :func:`pyhf.workspace.Workspace.data` ``with_aux`` keyword arg has been
  renamed to ``include_auxdata`` to improve API consistency.
  (PR :pr:`1562`)

.. |release v0.6.3| replace:: ``v0.6.3``
.. _`release v0.6.3`: https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/releases/tag/v0.6.3
