|release v0.6.2|_
=================

This is a patch release from ``v0.6.1`` → ``v0.6.2``.

Important Notes
---------------

* The :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.hepdata_like` API has been deprecated in favor of
  :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.uncorrelated_background`.
  The :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.hepdata_like` API will be removed in ``pyhf`` ``v0.7.0``.
  (PR :pr:`1438`)
* There is a small breaking API change for :func:`pyhf.contrib.viz.brazil.plot_results`.
  See the Python API changes section for more information.
* The :class:`pyhf.patchset.PatchSet` schema now allows string types for patch values in patchsets.
  (PR :pr:`1488`)
* Only lower bounds on core dependencies are now set.
  This allows for greater developer freedom and reduces the risk of breaking
  user's applications by unnecessarily constraining libraries.
  This also means that users will be responsible for ensuring that their
  installed dependencies do not conflict with or break ``pyhf``.
  c.f. Hynek Schlawack's blog post `Semantic Versioning Will Not Save You
  <https://hynek.me/articles/semver-will-not-save-you/>`_ for more in-depth coverage
  on this topic.
  For most users nothing should change.
  This mainly affects developers of other libraries in which ``pyhf`` is a dependency.
  (PR :pr:`1382`)
* Calling ``dir()`` on any ``pyhf`` module or trying to tab complete an API will
  now provide a more helpfully restricted view of the available APIs.
  This should help provide better exploration of the ``pyhf`` API.
  (PR :pr:`1403`)
* Docker images of releases are now published to both `Docker Hub
  <https://hub.docker.com/r/pyhf/pyhf/tags>`_ and to the `GitHub Container
  Registry <https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/pkgs/container/pyhf>`_.
  (PR :pr:`1444`)
* CUDA enabled Docker images are now available for release ``v0.6.1`` and later
  on `Docker Hub <https://hub.docker.com/r/pyhf/cuda>`__ and the `GitHub
  Container Registry <https://github.com/pyhf/cuda-images/pkgs/container/cuda-images>`__.
  Visit `github.com/pyhf/cuda-images <https://github.com/pyhf/cuda-images>`_ for more
  information.

Fixes
-----

* Allow for precision to be properly set for the tensorlib ``ones`` and ``zeros``
  methods through a ``dtype`` argument.
  This allows for precision to be properly set through the :func:`pyhf.set_backend`
  ``precision`` argument.
  (PR :pr:`1369`)
* The default precision for all backends is now ``64b``.
  (PR :pr:`1400`)
* Add check to ensure that POIs are not fixed during a fit.
  (PR :pr:`1409`)
* Parameter name strings are now normalized to remove trailing spaces.
  (PR :pr:`1436`)
* The logging level is now not automatically set in :class:`pyhf.contrib.utils`.
  (PR :pr:`1460`)

Features
--------

Python API
~~~~~~~~~~

* The :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.hepdata_like` API has been deprecated in favor of
  :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.uncorrelated_background`.
  The :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.hepdata_like` API will be removed in ``pyhf`` ``v0.7.0``.
  (PR :pr:`1438`)
* The :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.correlated_background` API has been added to
  provide an example model with a single channel with a correlated background
  uncertainty.
  (PR :pr:`1435`)
* Add CLs component plotting kwargs to :func:`pyhf.contrib.viz.brazil.plot_results`.
  This allows CLs+b and CLb components of the CLs ratio to be plotted as well.
  To be more consistent with the ``matplotlib`` API,
  :func:`pyhf.contrib.viz.brazil.plot_results` now returns a lists of the artists
  drawn on the axis and moves the ``ax`` arguments to the to the last argument.
  (PR :pr:`1377`)
* The ``pyhf.compat`` module has been added to aid in translating to and from ROOT
  names.
  (PR :pr:`1439`)

CLI API
~~~~~~~

* The CLI API now supports a ``patchset inspect`` API to list the individual
  patches in a ``PatchSet``.
  (PR :pr:`1412`)

.. code-block:: shell

  pyhf patchset inspect [OPTIONS] [PATCHSET]

Contributors
------------

``v0.6.2`` benefited from contributions from:

* Alexander Held

.. |release v0.6.2| replace:: ``v0.6.2``
.. _`release v0.6.2`: https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/releases/tag/v0.6.2
