|release v0.7.1|_
=================

This is a patch release from ``v0.7.0`` → ``v0.7.1``.

Important Notes
---------------

* Please note this release has **API breaking changes** and carefully read these
  notes while updating your code to the ``v0.7.0`` API.
* All backends are now fully compatible and tested with
  `Python 3.10 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0310/>`_.
  (PR :pr:`1809`)
* The ``pyhf.tensorlib.poisson`` API now allows for the expected rate parameter
  ``lam`` to be ``0`` in the case that the observed events ``n`` is ``0`` given
  that the limit :math:`\lim_{\lambda \to 0} \,\mathrm{Pois}(n | \lambda)` is well defined.
  (PR :pr:`1657`)
* :func:`pyhf.readxml.parse` now supports reading of XML configurations with absolute paths.
  To support this, ``pyhf xlm2json`` now has a ``-v/--mount`` option.
  (PR :pr:`1909`)
* Support for model specifications without a parameter of interest defined is added.
  (PRs :pr:`1638`, :pr:`1636`)
* The :class:`pyhf.parameters.paramsets` classes ``suggested_fixed`` attribute behavior has
  been updated.
  To access the behavior used in ``pyhf`` ``v0.6.x`` use the ``suggested_fixed_as_bool`` attribute.
  (PR :pr:`1639`)
* ``pyhf.pdf._ModelConfig.par_names`` is changed to be a property attribute.
  (PR :pr:`2027`)
* The order of model parameters is now sorted by model parameter name.
  (PR :pr:`1625`)
* Support for writing user custom modifiers is added.
  (PRs :pr:`1625`, :pr:`1644`)
* Performance in :class:`pyhf.readxml` is increased by improvements to
  :func:`pyhf.readxml.import_root_histogram`.
  (PR :pr:`1691`)
* :func:`pyhf.contrib.utils.download` is now more robust to different target file types.
  (PRs :pr:`1697`, :pr:`1704`)
* A ``pyhf.default_backend`` has been added that is configurable through a
  ``default`` kwarg in :func:`pyhf.set_backend`.
  (PR :pr:`1646`)
  This is part of work to make ``pyhf`` fully automatic differentiable.
  (Issue :issue:`882`)
* Schema validation now allows for both :class:`list` and ``pyhf.tensorlib`` objects
  to exist in the model specification.
  (PR :pr:`1647`)
* The minimum required dependencies have been updated to support added features:

   - ``scipy>=1.2.0`` (PR :pr:`1274`)
   - ``click>=8.0.0`` (PRs :pr:`1909`, :pr:`1958`)
   - ``jsonschema>=4.15.0`` (PRs :pr:`1976`, :pr:`1979`)
   - ``importlib_resources>=1.4.0`` (for Python 3.7, 3.8) (PR :pr:`1979`)
   - ``typing_extensions>=3.7.4.3`` (for Python 3.7 only) (PRs :pr:`1940`, :pr:`1961`)

* The minimum required backend versions have been updated to support added features:

   - JAX backend requires ``jax>=0.2.10``, ``jaxlib>=0.1.61`` (PR :pr:`1962`)
   - PyTorch backend requires ``torch>=1.10.0`` (PR :pr:`1657`)
   - TensorFlow backend requires ``tensorflow>=2.7.0``, ``tensorflow-probability>=0.11.0`` (PRs :pr:`1962`, :pr:`1657`)
   - iminuit optimizer requires ``iminuit>=2.7.0`` (PR :pr:`1895`)
   - ``'xmlio'`` extra requires ``uproot>=4.1.1`` (PR :pr:`1567`)

Fixes
-----

* Use improvements to ``jsonschema.RefResolver`` to avoid
  ``jsonschema.exceptions.RefResolutionError``.
  (PR :pr:`1976`)

* Use the conditional maximum likelihood estimators of the nuisance parameters
  to create the sampling distributions for :class:`pyhf.infer.calculators.ToyCalculator`.
  (PR :pr:`1610`)
  This follows the joint recommendations of the ATLAS and CMS experiments in
  |LHC Higgs search combination procedure|_.

Features
--------

Python API
~~~~~~~~~~

* The following functions have been added to the ``pyhf.tensorlib`` API:


   - ``pyhf.tensorlib.transpose`` (PR :pr:`1696`)
   - ``pyhf.tensorlib.percentile`` (PR :pr:`817`)


Contributors
------------

``v0.7.1`` benefited from contributions from:

* Alexander Held

.. |release v0.7.1| replace:: ``v0.7.1``
.. _`release v0.7.1`: https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/releases/tag/v0.7.1
