|release v0.7.0|_
=================

This is a minor release from ``v0.6.3`` → ``v0.7.0``.

Important Notes
---------------

* Please note this release has **API breaking changes** and carefully read these
  notes while updating your code to the ``v0.7.0`` API.
* All backends are now fully compatible and tested with
  `Python 3.10 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0310/>`_.
  (PR :pr:`1809`)
* The ``pyhf.tensorlib.poisson`` API now allows for the expected rate parameter
  ``lam`` to be ``0`` in the case that the observed events ``n`` is ``0`` given
  that the limit :math:`\lim_{\lambda \to 0} \,\mathrm{Pois}(n | \lambda)` is well defined.
  (PR :pr:`1657`)
* :class:`pyhf.readxml` now supports reading of XML configurations with absolute paths.
  To support this, ``pyhf xlm2json`` now has ``-v/--mount`` options.
  (PR :pr:`1909`)
* Support for writing user custom modifiers is added.
  (PRs :pr:`1625`, :pr:`1644`)
* Performance in :class:`pyhf.readxml` is increased by improvements to
  :func:`pyhf.readxml.import_root_histogram`.
  (PR :pr:`1691`)
* Support for model specifications without a parameter of interest defined is added.
  (PRs :pr:`1638`, :pr:`1636`)
* :func:`pyhf.contrib.utils.download` is now more robust to different target file types.
  (PRs :pr:`1697`, :pr:`1704`)
* A ``pyhf.default_backend`` has been added that is configurable through a
  ``default`` kwarg in :func:`pyhf.set_backend`.
  (PR :pr:`1646`)
* :func:`pyhf.pdf.Model` now allows for both :class:`list` and ``pyhf.tensorlib`` objects
  to exist in the ``spec``.
  (PR :pr:`1647`)
* The minimum required dependencies have been updated to support added features:

   - ``scipy>=1.2.0``
   - ``click>=8.0.0``
   - ``jsonschema>=4.15.0``
   - ``importlib_resources>=1.4.0`` (for Python 3.7, 3.8)
   - ``typing_extensions>=3.7.4.3`` (for Python 3.7 only)

* The minimum required backend versions have been updated to support added features:

   - JAX backend requires ``jax>=0.2.10``, ``jaxlib>=0.1.61``
   - PyTorch backend requires ``torch>=1.10.0``
   - TensorFlow backend requires ``tensorflow>=2.7.0``, ``tensorflow-probability>=0.11.0``
   - iminuit optimizer requires ``iminuit>=2.7.0``
   - xmlio extra requires ``uproot>=4.1.1``

Fixes
-----

* Use improvements to ``jsonschema.RefResolver`` to avoid
  ``jsonschema.exceptions.RefResolutionError``.
  (PR :pr:`1976`)

* Use the conditional maximum likelihood estimators of the nuisance parameters
  to create the sampling distributions for :class:`pyhf.infer.calculators.ToyCalculator`.
  (PR :pr:`1610`)
  This follows the joint recommendations of the ATLAS and CMS experiments in
  |LHC Higgs search combination procedure|_.

Features
--------

Python API
~~~~~~~~~~

* Supported options for :func:`pyhf.infer.hypotest` can now be passed as kwargs
  through the :func:`pyhf.infer.intervals.upper_limits.upper_limit` API.
  (PR :pr:`1613`)
  This now enables things like using :class:`pyhf.infer.calculators.ToyCalculator`
  as the calculator used for the hypothesis test scan:

  .. code:: pycon

      >>> import numpy as np
      >>> import pyhf
      >>> pyhf.set_backend("jax")
      >>> model = pyhf.simplemodels.uncorrelated_background(
      ...     signal=[12.0, 11.0], bkg=[50.0, 52.0], bkg_uncertainty=[3.0, 7.0]
      ... )
      >>> observations = [51, 48]
      >>> data = pyhf.tensorlib.astensor(observations + model.config.auxdata)
      >>> scan = np.linspace(0, 5, 21)
      >>> obs_limit, exp_limits, (scan, results) = pyhf.infer.intervals.upper_limits.upper_limit(
      ...     data, model, scan, return_results=True, calctype="toybased", ntoys=3000
      ... )

* Add support for overriding the paths for finding schemas, using the ``pyhf``
  installed location as a base via ``pyhf.utils.schemas``.
  (PRs :pr:`1753`, :pr:`1818``)

  .. code:: pycon

      >>> from pathlib import Path
      >>> import pyhf.schema
      >>> current_schema_path = pyhf.schema.path
      >>> current_schema_path
      PosixPath('/path/to/your/venv/lib/python3.X/site-packages/pyhf/schemas')
      >>> custom_schema_path = Path("/path/to/custom/pyhf/schema")
      >>> with pyhf.schema(custom_schema_path):
      ...     print(repr(pyhf.schema.path))
      ...
      PosixPath('/path/to/custom/pyhf/schema')
      >>> pyhf.schema.path
      PosixPath('/path/to/your/venv/lib/python3.X/site-packages/pyhf/schemas')

* Add ``{modifier}_builder`` classes for all modifiers.
  (PRs :pr:`1625`)
  For example, :class:`pyhf.modifiers.histosys.histosys_builder`.

* In :func:`pyhf.workspace.Workspace.model` the parameter of interest specified
  in the measurement may now be overridden using the added ``poi_name`` kwarg.
  (PR :pr:`1636`)

* Support for writing user custom modifiers is added.
  (PRs :pr:`1625`, :pr:`1644`)

* Allow for fit parameter values from required fits in ``pyhf.infer.test_statistics``
  functions to be returned by use of ``return_fitted_pars`` kwarg with the
  ``pyhf.infer.test_statistics`` functions and ``return_calculator`` kwarg with
  :func:`pyhf.infer.hypotest`.
  (PR :pr:`1554`)

* A ``pyhf.default_backend`` has been added that is configurable through a
  ``default`` kwarg in :func:`pyhf.set_backend`.
  (PR :pr:`1646`)
  This allows setting setting the ``pyhf.default_backend`` to be different from the value of
  ``pyhf.tensorlib`` returned by :func:`pyhf.get_backend`, which can be useful in situations
  where differentiable model construction is needed.

  .. code:: pycon

      >>> import jax
      >>> import pyhf
      >>> pyhf.set_backend("jax", default=True)
      >>> pyhf.set_backend("numpy")
      >>> pyhf.get_backend()
      (<pyhf.tensor.numpy_backend.numpy_backend object at 0x...>, <pyhf.optimize.scipy_optimizer object at 0x...>)
      >>> pyhf.default_backend
      <pyhf.tensor.jax_backend.jax_backend object at 0x...>
      >>> def example_op(x):
      ...     return 2 * pyhf.default_backend.power(pyhf.default_backend.astensor(x), 3)
      ...
      >>> example_op([2.0])
      DeviceArray([16.], dtype=float64)
      >>> jax.jacrev(jax.jit(example_op))([2.0])
      [DeviceArray([24.], dtype=float64, weak_type=True)]

* A ``validate`` kwarg has been added to :func:`pyhf.workspace.Workspace` and
  :func:`pyhf.pdf.Model` to allow skipping validation.
  (PR :pr:`1646`)
  This should only be used by expert users who understand the risks.

* The following functions have been added to the ``pyhf.tensorlib`` API:


   - ``pyhf.tensorlib.transpose``
     (PR :pr:`1696`)
   - ``pyhf.tensorlib.percentile``
     (PR :pr:`817`)

* :class:`pyhf.readxml` now supports reading of XML configurations with absolute paths.
  (PR :pr:`1909`)

* :func:`pyhf.pdf.Model` now allows for both :class:`list` and ``pyhf.tensorlib`` objects
  to exist in the ``spec``.
  (PR :pr:`1647`)

  .. code:: pycon

      >>> import pyhf
      >>> signal = pyhf.tensorlib.astensor([12.0, 11.0])
      >>> background = pyhf.tensorlib.astensor([50.0, 52.0])
      >>> background_uncertainty = pyhf.tensorlib.astensor([3.0, 7.0])
      >>> model = pyhf.simplemodels.uncorrelated_background(
      ...     signal=signal, bkg=background, bkg_uncertainty=background_uncertainty
      ... )


CLI API
~~~~~~~

* The ``pyhf xlm2json`` CLI API now has a ``-v/--mount`` option to support reading
  XML configurations with absolute paths.
  (PR :pr:`1909`)
  Similar to Docker volume mounts, the options allows a user to pass two fields
  separated by a colon (``:``).
  The first field is a local path and the second field is the absolute path specified
  in the XML configuration to be substituted.
  Without the ``-v/--mount`` option a user would have to manually edit the absolute
  path in each XML file it appeared in!

  .. code:: console

      pyhf xml2json \
          --mount /local/path/to/workspace:/absolute/path/to/replace/inside/xml \
          --output-file workspace.json \
          workspace/analysis_config.xml

Deprecations
------------

Python API
~~~~~~~~~~

* The :func:`pyhf.infer.intervals.upperlimit` API has been deprecated in favor of
  :func:`pyhf.infer.intervals.upper_limits.upper_limit`.
  The :func:`pyhf.infer.intervals.upperlimit` API will removed in ``pyhf`` ``v0.9.0``.
  (PR :pr:`1274`)

Removals
--------

Python API
~~~~~~~~~~

* The :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.hepdata_like` API, deprecated since ``pyhf``
  ``v0.6.2``, has been removed.
  (PR :pr:`1670`)
  Use the :func:`pyhf.simplemodels.uncorrelated_background` API instead.

* :class:`pyhf.workspace.Workspace`'s ``parameters`` attribute is removed in favor of
  using :class:`pyhf.pdf._ModelConfig`'s ``parameters``.
  (PR :pr:`1625`)

* :func:`pyhf.workspace.Workspace.get_measurement` has the ``poi_name`` kwarg removed.
  (PR :pr:`1636`)

Contributors
------------

``v0.7.0`` benefited from contributions from:

* Alexander Held
* Mason Proffitt
* Lars Henkelmann
* Aryan Roy
* Graeme Watt
* Jerry Ling
* Nathan Simpson
* Beojan Stanislaus

.. |release v0.7.0| replace:: ``v0.7.0``
.. _`release v0.7.0`: https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/releases/tag/v0.7.0

.. _LHC Higgs search combination procedure: https://inspirehep.net/literature/1196797
.. |LHC Higgs search combination procedure| replace:: *Procedure for the LHC Higgs boson search combination in Summer 2011*
